[Home](index.md)

Changing the order. Me first. Then tea with prologues. Coffee later.

Government Arts College Coimbatore was a large campus occupying a fair sized arc of the race track between the outer road of the extinct Race Course and the inner grounds. Just the name, 
Race course road, no track, no grounds, no greenery; it was all buildings and roads. From the college gate on one road to the other it was probably a neat furlong. It was the days before kilometre and a furlong is an eighth of a mile. At the main entrance there was a portico with a Grecian colonnade and an arch. The words, “ Sapere Aude” were dug out on the arch, and painted over in black dulled with age. It was 1957 B G. i.e. before google, and so for quite sometime the words were meaningless. 

We had an English lecturer, Mr. Ramaramana Unni, idiosyncratic (like Calculus Srinivasan of St.Joseph’s College, more about him later) to the point of saying in an intense tone and with eyes half closed, “ Only one rule for my class. Don’t ever disturb me during the lecture. If you are late, don’t stand at the entrance, just walk in quietly to your seat. Better if you don’t walk infront of me, better still, come by the back entrance of the gallery and walk down the steps softly. Absolute quiet is a must when Agamemnon is about to sacrifice Iphigenia”. His class was like watching Shakespearian theatre. Every word in the poem would come alive. I don’t think any of us were ever late to his class. One day I asked him the meaning of Sapere Aude. He looked at me and said, “ It means, Dare to be wise. I would say though, Dare to dream”. 

After class, we would walk down to Lucky Cafe on Avanashi Road at one corner of a four road intersection. Right across was the Bus services depot of UMS, United Motor Service of the famous/infamous? G.D.Naidu. He registered each bus in the names of the driver and the conductor with names like Udumalpet Service, Dharapuram Service etc... to defeat some archaic motor vehicle rule that no one can run a fleet of buses. The Government could do nothing about it although all the buses were run out of the same depot. No benami laws then and maybe Mr. Naidu would have really given away the buses to the drivers if the Government had moved. Story goes that he was a man who took a hammer and destroyed a car he had imported from Germany rather than pay exorbitant duties, then bought the car in the Customs auction for a pittance and rebuilt it in his garage. He trusted the drivers and conductors and they were loyal to him. All that is another story. 

Lucky cafe had square tables with marble-slab tops and plastic table cloths in red and blue. The chairs were wrought iron with trellis designs. Tea there had a special taste and it was rumoured that egg white was added to the milk while it was boiled. This kept a few students from going there. Tea would be served in white cups on saucers. Slurping was frowned upon and the tea would be really hot, so it would take time to sip through a cup. It must have been a sales gimmick to make people order something more, exploiting consumer’s guilt feelings for sitting for a long time while ordering only a cup of tea.  Temptation was on display in the form of cakes and pastries in all-glass containers in two layers one above the other just beside the tall cash counter at the entrance. On top of the containers were a row of glass jars with cookies and biscuits.  Prices could be seen on paper stuck on the jars with notations like 0-1-0 or  0-1-6 etc... That is Rupees, annas and Pice. 16 annas made one Rupee and 12 pice for an anna  i.e. 192 pice for a Rupee.  A Rupee was a big amount, 192 big and one could actually buy things for a few pice. The annas and pice were going away and naya paisa, the new pice, a hundred to a Rupee instead of the 192 was just around the corner and biscuits were going to be more expensive. A cup of tea was one anna. The waiter would ask if we wanted something else, maybe biscuits.  Tea plus something else was beyond our reach and a visit to Lucky Cafe was an indulgence and it was almost always a no. The hot tea suited us all right and we would sit there and watch the traffic through the glass windows and gossip away. We were proud of our small victory over their commercial wiles and would laugh and joke about it. 

From Coimbatore to Ooty Government Arts College for the graduate course. The college was in a beautiful complex of buildings on Stone House Hill, that was originally the summer headquarters for the Madras Legislative Assembly. A winding road down took you to Ooty’s Charing Cross. Of course, you could always take the shorter but steeper footpath down. Another footpath took you down to De Lisle, a beautiful cottage where Sir C P Ramaswamy Iyer, Dewan of the erstwhile Travancore State and quite a few other accomplishments, lived. We wanted to invite him for a college function. He was not too keen and we had to be satisfied with having met him.  Almost all places in Ooty had quaint English names. Assembly Rooms and Coronation were theatres and the style was disturbed only when A Thammanna Chettiar built a new theatre and named it ATC theatre. The road from Charing Cross to the Railway Station along the upper slopes was called Willowbund. And then there was the Botanical Gardens, with Raj Bhavan, the summer residence for the Governor. True to its character of being a hill station the garden was laid out on the slopes of hills. One could, with some difficulty, trek through snaky trails to Doddabetta (the big mountain in Badaga language), the highest point of the Nilgiri hill range. And there was a tribal settlement for the Todas on the top ranges of the garden. Occasionally one could see a Toda in his or her traditional dress of a large thick cotton sheet with broad red and black stripes wrapped around the whole body leaving one shoulder bare and the lower part of the legs uncovered. Some would be wearing leather thongs sandals, but most would be barefooted. It was the same dress for all seasons. I don’t think they could tell summer from winter. 

The ubiquitous Nair had his tea shop on the far edge of the ground adjoining the college. It was a lean to structure open on three sides with large top-open tin boxes lining the front and sides. There was a copper steam boiler for making tea at one end. The boxes will be filled with Banana bhajjis (bhujias if you have lived in Northern India). Ooty weather being what it is the bhajjis will usually be cold to the touch and rarely warm if the lot at the top had just been fried. In a kind of free for all most of us will dip into the boxes for the bhajjis two or three at a time. And stand there gossiping and munching. Say, a half hour later each of us will give Nair a count of how many we had taken. Morris and Rajasekar from Coonoor were the honest ones. The other Rajasekar from Lovedale and myself will generally give a discounted number. Nair possibly knew this, but he was generous or the extras were priced in. He never questioned us seriously or stopped us from dipping into the box. Ah! the tea. Nair’s tea was more hot water than tea. Nair was the original health guru and spiked the milk with generous doses of water to remove all fat and cholesterol. The tea boiler had two chambers. The inner one will be filled with charcoal to heat up the boiler. Around this an annular chamber will be half filled with water that will issue as steam as it heats up. At the top of the chamber there was a circular hole. A bag made of porous hosiery cloth drooping down from a steel ring that just fit over the hole will be placed there. Called the tea filter. Every so often he will add some tea dust to the contraption.  He will wait a minute, take the filter out and squeeze it over the glass tumbler. The brown tea liquid will drip on to the milk and form a golden circle on the top layer. You can have your tea then. Some would ask him, ஆத்திக்குடுப்பா, i.e make it less hot. Once, someone asked him for the ‘Two feet tea’. The name stuck and it became a kind of joke. Anyway, Nair’s assistant will perform the traditional magic of measuring the tea throwing it from an aluminium jug to another aluminium jug held horizontally across at a distance some two feet away. To begin with it will be up and down. But as he picks up speed his hands will move more and more parallel to the ground. And the tea will not spill. When he is done, you get frothy tea. It will be poured onto glass tumblers kept in a row on a glass plate covering one of the bhajji tins. Sometimes Nair will take out out the filter and squeeze a few more drops of tea into the glass tumblers. Most days we would opt out; we would rather save the extra anna for more bhajjis. 

Just one more tea episode. The setting is Leela Palace Hotel outside the Bombay Airport. Not yet Mumbai and not yet Chatrapati Shivaji Terminal. I was then working in an Arab bank.  My Iranian boss Mr.  Khoshabbi, and I were seated in the lavishly appointed Coffee Shop. His drink of choice was tea. He was a connoisseur. He could hold forth on Black, White, Green, Oolong and Puerh tea; and on Earl Grey and Darjeeling. He despised tea bags and would insist on tea being brewed in a pot for just the right length of time. The waiter in the Coffee Shop was knowledgable and brought over quite a variety of teas in golden coloured tins and six or seven glass jugs filled with decoctions of different teas. But Mr. Khoshabbi would have none of it.  He had to have his tea brewed in tea pots; the tea leaves had to simmer in the pot for the right length of time. So, the waiter brought four tea pots filled with hot water and covered with cloth tea cosys in brilliant colours. We had a couple of hours before he would go to the airport. So, he tried a few of the teas and I tried one. Tea for him was the brewed liquid, no milk no sugar.  He kept adding hot water to the tea until he found the right taste. It was a strange taste for me. On his advice, I added more hot water, thinking of Nair. The taste was all right and it was almost likeable. 

To coffee, the perennial favourite of the Madrasi. Today’s Chennaite, although the term denotes more broadly everyone of the erstwhile Madras Presidency, except the Keralite who always preferred his tea.  Not only the favourite, many live for it and swear by it. For the Madrasi life without fresh filter coffee in the morning is not worth living. 

More and more the word Madrasi is not liked, thanks to V P Menon who thought up and implemented linguistic reorganisation of States and created everlasting enmity in people who were friendly earlier. This happened while we were in Delhi.  A friend of mine called Das was from Hyderabad and as we walked out for a chat plate of cut fruits peppered with actually pepper and salt would be annoyed when someone called us Madrasis. He would retort pointing at me, “he is the Madrasi, I am not.”

I was brought up on Round-trees Cocoa as were my cousins in our Grandparents’ place. A sip of coffee came as a reward in the third year of my stay with them, in return for helping grind the roasted coffee beans in the manual grinder. I suppose I wasn’t tall enough to reach the handle of the grinder earlier. And my grandmother was getting older and it was the right time to pass on this chore. The family had moved on from brass vessels to stainless steel just beginning to become popular and known as “ Eversilver”. Four sets of dinner plates, tumblers, and  small plates smaller than what one would call quarter plates (a kind of coaster cum cover for the tumblers) were bought. One set for each of us. My grandmother would pour two thimblefuls of coffee in my tumbler. Maybe I exaggerate, but it was really a small measure of coffee, but the taste lingers both on the tongue and in the mind. The fresh ground powder, the aroma locked in the roasted bean released on being ground. Fresh decoction; it had to be. There was no way keep it fresh if stored; store it for a day and it will turn sour in those unrefrigerated days. Fresh milk, you did not have any other kind those days, no fridge, no sachets. Everything fresh must have given it the extraordinary flavour. After all these years I still think it was the best coffee I had, ever. 

I remember two places in New Delhi where I used to go for coffee. One was the Standard restaurant one floor above Regal cinema in Connaught Circus.  Six in the evening. You walk up the broad wooden stairs and take any seat there. Not many customers at that hour. You order for a cup of coffee. It is served in a tall cup with an accompanying biscuit on a plate. The biscuit was exceptionally, extraordinarily tasty. I went there more for the biscuit than the coffee. In later years I learnt it was what is called a biscotti.  

The second place was called PRRM, also in Connaught Place, along the radial road into the middle and inner circles leading off from Parliament Street. PRRM, Price Raise Resistance Movement, the restaurant was housed entirely under rainbow coloured canopies, locally called Shamiyanas. In effect a tent of thick cloth on round steel columns, covered on the top and the sides leaving some openings for entry. The kitchen was partially hidden by display cases with glass fronts and you could see  ‘pakoras’ and sandwiches wrapped in cellophane paper stacked inside. Metal tables and chairs, cold to the touch in winter and hot in the summer months made sitting for any length of time uncomfortable. PRRM could not afford any better and the cloth canopy and open air kept the heat bearable. And in the winter months, the cold was pleasant in daytime and evenings as long as you wore warm clothing.  PRRM was started?, (I am not sure) by some Members of Parliament in protest against the prices at restaurants in Connaught Place. I think they were used to the ridiculously low priced canteen in the Parliament house. They wanted a place outside Parliament where they could sit and plot the downfall of the Government or perhaps the destruction of its enemies. PRRM was cheap. A friend told me in jest that PRRM got all supplies at DGS&D rates. DGS&D was for procurement of essential items for government use and in complex manoeuvres involving excise duties, taxes and their waivers the prices were kept low and earned the nickname of DGS&D rates. It was not for fixing prices of milk and atta and coffee powder. But the hand of the MPs was somewhere there. 

I liked the coffee there, and one could eavesdrop on unedited firsthand reports of the political happenings of the day. One forecast of PRRM gossip that came true was the spectacular win of the Bharatiya Jan Sangh in the Delhi elections of 1967. They took 6 of the seven MP seats of Delhi. The most notable win was that of ML Sondhi a senior IFS officer who had resigned over differences with the  EAM, and joined the Sangh. EAM for External Affairs Minister. Does the word Affairs reflect a reactive stance instead of Foreign Policy which could indicate some thought about how we relate to the rest of the world?  A special of PRRM was cold coffee with coffee flavoured ice cream. I developed a taste for it and it became my favourite drink at PRRM.

The coffee saga continues, with mismanaged chronology, in Trichy of 1958 and of the famous Malaikkottai pillaiyar koil i.e. the Rockfort Ganesh Temple. I was a hosteller in Clives Hostel right next to Rockfort. The hostel gates will be opened at 5.00 in the morning and we could go out for the morning coffee. A hundred odd yards away on Chinnakadai street was Ambi’s Cafe where they served “ degree coffee”. Degree coffee supposedly was made with milk tested for purity using a lactometer to show the extent of water in the milk.  The lactometer bulb will not sink if water had not been added to the milk. I don’t know if they ever did it, but certainly not when we visited the Cafe. But the coffee was good, served in brass “டவரா டம்ப்ளர்”  Tumbler of course is an English word, but I don’t know the English word for டவரா. The “davara” like the saucer for the cup is a holder, with an additional purpose of cooling down the hot coffee to temperatures acceptable to the tongue by letting it cool down in the more open vessel than the cup or the tumbler. Once again, I think the fresh brew and fresh milk combination made the coffee good. 
